# DCD Reading Club
Next meeting date: TBD

Next reading: "Total Error in a Big Data World: Adapting the TSE Framework to Big Data," Ashley Amaya, Paul P Biemer, David Kinyon, _Journal of Survey Statistics and Methodology_, Volume 8, Issue 1, February 2020, Pages 89–119, [https://doi.org/10.1093/jssam/smz056](https://doi.org/10.1093/jssam/smz056)

## Suggestions
[Statistical inference in the 21st century: moving beyond p<0.05](https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2019.1583913) (Special issue of _The American Statistician_)

	Abstract: Some of you exploring this special issue of The American Statistician might be wondering if it’s a scolding from pedantic statisticians lecturing you about what not to do with p-values, without offering any real ideas of what to do about the very hard problem of separating signal from noise in data and making decisions under uncertainty. Fear not. In this issue, thanks to 43 innovative and thought-provoking papers from forward-looking statisticians, help is on the way.

[The garden of forking paths: when multiple comparisons can be a problem, even when there is no "fishing expedition" or "p-hacking" and the research hypothesis was posited ahead of time](https://www.stat.columbia.edu/~gelman/research/unpublished/p_hacking.pdf)

	Abstract: Researcher degrees of freedom can lead to a multiple comparisons problem, even in settingswhere researchers perform only a single analysis on their data.  The problem is there can be alarge number ofpotentialcomparisons when the details of data analysis are highly contingent ondata, without the researcher having to perform any conscious procedure of fishing or examiningmultiple  p-values.   We  discuss  in  the  context  of  several  examples  of  published  papers  wheredata-analysis decisions were theoretically-motivated based on previous literature, but where thedetails of data selection and analysis were not pre-specified and, as a result, were contingent ondata

[Specification curve analysis](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-020-0912-z)

	Abstract: Empirical results hinge on analytical decisions that are defensible, arbitrary and motivated. These decisions probably introduce bias (towards the narrative put forward by the authors), and they certainly involve variability not reflected by standard errors. To address this source of noise and bias, we introduce specification curve analysis, which consists of three steps: (1) identifying the set of theoretically justified, statistically valid and non-redundant specifications; (2) displaying the results graphically, allowing readers to identify consequential specifications decisions; and (3) conducting joint inference across all specifications. We illustrate the use of this technique by applying it to three findings from two different papers, one investigating discrimination based on distinctively Black names, the other investigating the effect of assigning female versus male names to hurricanes. Specification curve analysis reveals that one finding is robust, one is weak and one is not robust at all.

[How Biased is the Population of Facebook Users? Comparingthe Demographics of Facebook Users with Census Data toGenerate Correction Factors](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2005.08065.pdf)

	Abstract: Censuses and representative sampling surveys around the worldare key sources of data to guide government investments and publicpolicies. However, these sources are very expensive to obtain andare collected relatively infrequently. Over the last decade, therehas been growing interest in the use of data from social media tocomplement more traditional data sources. However, social me-dia users are not representative of the general population. Thus,analyses based on social media data require statistical adjustments,like post-stratification, in order to remove the bias and make solidstatistical claims. These adjustments are possible only when wehave information about the frequency of demographic groups usingsocial media. These data, when compared with official statistics,enable researchers to produce appropriate statistical correction fac-tors. In this paper, we leverage the Facebook advertising platformto compile the equivalent of an aggregate-level census of Facebookusers. Our compilation includes the population distribution forseven demographic attributes such as gender, political leaning, andeducational attainment at different geographic levels for the U.S.(country, state, and city). By comparing the Facebook counts withofficial reports provided by the U.S. Census and Gallup, we foundvery high correlations, especially for political leaning and race. Wealso identified instances where official statistics may be underes-timating population counts as in the case of immigration. We usethe information collected to calculate bias correction factors forall computed attributes in order to evaluate the extent to whichdifferent demographic groups are more or less represented on Face-book, and to derive the actual distributions for specific audiences ofinterest. We provide the first comprehensive analysis for assessingbiases in Facebook users across several dimensions. This informa-tion can be used to generate bias-adjusted population estimatesand demographic counts in a timely way and at fine geographicgranularity in between data releases of official statistics.

[Explaining Gender Differences in Academics' Career Trajectories](https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.10830)

	Abstract: Academic fields exhibit substantial levels of gender segregation. To date, most attempts to explain this persistent global phenomenon have relied on limited cross-sections of data from specific countries, fields, or career stages. Here we used a global longitudinal dataset assembled from profiles on this http URL to investigate which characteristics of a field predict gender differences among the academics who leave and join that field. Only two field characteristics consistently predicted such differences: (1) the extent to which a field values raw intellectual talent ("brilliance") and (2) whether a field is in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). Women more than men moved away from brilliance-oriented and STEM fields, and men more than women moved toward these fields. Our findings suggest that stereotypes associating brilliance and other STEM-relevant traits with men more than women play a key role in maintaining gender segregation across academia.

[A New Algorithmic Identity: Soft Biopolitics and the Modulation of Control](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0263276411424420)

	Abstract: Marketing and web analytic companies have implemented sophisticated algorithms to observe, analyze, and identify users through large surveillance networks online. These computer algorithms have the capacity to infer categories of identity upon users based largely on their web-surfing habits. In this article I will first discuss the conceptual and theoretical work around code, outlining its use in an analysis of online categorization practices. The article will then approach the function of code at the level of the category, arguing that an analysis of coded computer algorithms enables a supplement to Foucauldian thinking around biopolitics and biopower, of what I call soft biopower and soft biopolitics. These new conceptual devices allow us to better understand the workings of biopower at the level of the category, of using computer code, statistics and surveillance to construct categories within populations according to users’ surveilled internet history. Finally, the article will think through the nuanced ways that algorithmic inference works as a mode of control, of processes of identification that structure and regulate our lives online within the context of online marketing and algorithmic categorization.


## Past readings
Matt Salganik, _Bit by bit_, [chapter 6](https://www.bitbybitbook.com/en/1st-ed/ethics/)

Edelmann et al., "Computational Social Science and Sociology," _Annual Review of Sociology_, 2020, 46:61-81, DOI:[10.1146/annurev-soc-121919-054621](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-121919-054621)

Amaya et al., "Total Error in a Big Data World: Adapting the TSE Framework to Big Data," _Journal of Survey Statistics and Methodology_, 2020, 8 (1), 89-119, [https://doi.org/10.1093/jssam/smz056](https://doi.org/10.1093/jssam/smz056)
